# Loops

Loops are a type of control flow structure that moves control back to the beginning of the statement. Loops are used to run the same code multiple times in sequence. Loops are also used as the standard way of interacting with collections, because they allow every element to be accessed exactly once.

## While

```
while (expression)
{
    # Repeats continuously if the expression is true
}
```

Recall that an `if` statement moves control inside of its scope if a given boolean expression evaluates to true. A `while` loop is used to repeatedly run code within its scope while the condition is true. Let's view a basic example that counts up to 10:

```
int Count = 0
while (Count < 10)
{
    Count = Count + 1
}
```

When the program starts, `Count` is less than 10. Control shifts to being inside the loop, and `Count` increases by 1. The code inside of the loop will repeat until `Count` is less than 10. The next example will utilize a more complicated way of ending the loop:

```
string 
```

### Incrementation

Incrementation is a common necessity when utilizing loops. You may have noticed that it is wordy to write `Variable = Variable + 1` every time a variable should increase by 1. While this _does_ increase a variable's count by 1, there are two shorthands for this:

1. **Compound Assignemnt** will assign a variable to the result of the provided operator. The left-hand side of the operator is the variable on the left side of the assignment, and the right-hand side of the operator is the result of the right. For arithmetic, the operators `+=`, `-=`, `*=`, `/=`, and `%=` 

### Do-while

```
do
{

}
while (expression)
```

Like the while loop, a do-while loop checks for a condition to break. Unlike a standard while loop, do-while loops check for the condition at the _end_ of the loop. The distinction means that a do-while loop will _always_ run at least once, even if the condition evaluates to false.

```
int Times_Ran = 0

do
{
    Times_Ran = Times_Ran + 1
}
while (false)

# Times_Ran == 1
```

Do-while loops are great for repeating code _until_ a condition is true.